TORONTO MUNICIPAL CODE 
CHAPTER 39, DEFENCE AND INDEMNIFICATION 

Chapter 39 

DEFENCE AND INDEMNIFICATION 

ARTICLE I 
Y2K Employee Indemnification 

§ 39-1. Definitions. 

§ 39-2. Condition precedent. 

§ 39-3. Employee to notify city of action or threatened action. 

§ 39-4. Legal defence; damages and costs. 

§ 39-5. Conflicts. 

§ 39-6. Investigation, negotiation and settlement. 

§ 39-7. Counterclaims and third-party actions. 

§ 39-8. Appeals by the employee. 

§ 39-9. Assessment of accounts. 

§ 39-10. Without prejudice. 

[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the City of Toronto as indicated in article histories. 
Amendments noted where applicable.] 

General References 

Arbitration Act, 1991 - See S.O. 1991, c. 17. 
Municipal Act, - See R.S.O. 1990, c. M. 45. 

ARTICLE I 
Y2K Employee Indemnification 
[Adopted 1999-11-25 by By-law No. 808-19991] 

§ 39-1. Definitions. 

As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:  

ACTION - A civil action or claim commenced or threatened to be commenced after the passing 
of this article containing allegations that a person or persons have suffered damages, or seeking 
some other remedy, arising out of an alleged act or omission of one or more employees of the 
City of Toronto and relating, directly or indirectly, to the Year 2000 problem (as defined below). 
An "action" includes the appeal of any final judgement in the action where the employee is a 
respondent in the appeal. 

1

 Editor's Note: This by-law was passed under the authority of clause 50 of section 207 and section 252 of the Municipal Act, R.S.O. 1990, 
c. M.45. 

39-1 

December 30, 2000 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
TORONTO MUNICIPAL CODE 
CHAPTER 39, DEFENCE AND INDEMNIFICATION 

EMPLOYEE - An employee, former employee, salaried officer or former salaried officer of the 
City (including any of its predecessor municipalities) who, during his or her term of employment 
or office with the City, works or has worked for the City, directly or indirectly, or makes or has 
made a decision for or on behalf of the City while acting in his or her capacity as an employee or 
officer of the City or gives or has given advice of any kind to the City or any of its local boards 
on matters relating to the Year 2000 problem and includes a member or former member of 
Council of the City (including any of its predecessor municipalities) who, during his or her term 
of office on Council, works or has worked for the City, directly or indirectly, or makes or has 
made a decision while acting in his or her capacity as a member of Council or an officer of the 
City on matters relating to the Year 2000 problem. 

YEAR 2000 PROBLEM - The failure of computer software, hardware or devices containing 
embedded chips to accept, calculate, compare, sort, extract, sequence or process accurately date 
inputs or date values or the failure to accurately return, generate, process or display accurately 
date output or date values, as a result, directly or indirectly, of the transition up to, during and 
beyond the date January 1, 2000. 

§ 39-2. Condition precedent. 

The provision of coverage under this article shall be subject to and conditional upon any rights, 
obligations and duties of any insurer of the City that may respond to an action under an insurance 
policy issued to the City and is subject to any rights, obligations and duties of the City and its 
employees in respect of such insurance. By virtue of the Municipal Act, this article does not 
apply to an act or omission of an employee that occurred prior to June 20, 1978, but, if the 
employee (as defined above) is a member or former member of Council, it does not apply to an 
act or omission that occurred prior to December 15, 1978. 

§ 39-3. Employee to notify city of action or threatened action. 

Where an employee becomes aware that an action has been commenced or threatened against the 
employee, the employee shall forthwith provide the City with notice of the same.  

§ 39-4. Legal defence; damages and costs. 

A. 

B. 

After receiving notice of an action, the City shall, as soon as is reasonably possible, 
determine the factual background to the action and shall determine whether the employee 
will be afforded coverage under this article. The employee will co-operate with the City 
to permit the City to determine the factual background to the action and provide all 
necessary assistance that the City requests. 

Provided that the City determines that the employee's connection, if any, with the 
allegations related to the action involves the employee's attempted performance in good 
faith of his or her duties and subject to compliance by the employee with the provisions 
of this article, in an action, the City will: 

(1) 

Represent the employee in the name of, and on behalf of, the employee through 
counsel employed by the City or through the payment of all legal costs of the 

39-2 

December 30, 2000 

 
 
 
TORONTO MUNICIPAL CODE 
CHAPTER 39, DEFENCE AND INDEMNIFICATION 

employee, from time to time and as they are incurred, in defending the action 
through the use of outside counsel retained by the City. 

(2) 

(3) 

Pay all damages and legal costs, including interest, awarded against an employee. 

Pay all sums required in connection with the settlement of the action, provided 
that the City approves of the terms of the settlement. 

C. 

Subject only to § 39-5, the City shall, in its sole discretion, determine whether to 
represent the employee in the action through the use of counsel employed by the City or 
through the use of outside counsel retained by the City. [Amended 2000-10-05 by By-
law No. 869-2000] 

D.  Where the City represents the employee in the action, whether through the use of counsel 

employed by the City or through the use of outside counsel, the City and the employee 
shall co-operate and consult with one another. However, all decisions to be made in the 
defence of the action (including decisions in respect of any counterclaim by the employee 
or in the prosecution of a third-party claim) shall be made by the City, in its sole 
discretion, after having taken into account the consultations with the employee. 

E. 

F. 

G. 

The City may, in its sole discretion, determine that an employee is not entitled to 
coverage pursuant to this article because the City has determined that the employee has 
not acted in good faith in the attempted performance of his or her duties or has not 
otherwise complied with the terms of this article. In such circumstances, that employee 
shall be responsible for all costs in connection with his or her defence of the action, and 
the employee shall be responsible for the payment of any damages or costs awarded 
against him or her in the action. In addition, in such circumstances, the City reserves the 
right to claim indemnity from the employee for any damages or costs which may be 
suffered by the City. 

Where the City has paid for the legal costs associated with the defence by an employee of 
an action in the reasonable belief that the employee had acted in good faith in the 
attempted performance of his or her duties and it is later determined by a court of 
competent jurisdiction or the City that the employee did not act in good faith in the 
attempted performance of his or her duties, then in such circumstances that employee 
shall be responsible for all costs in connection with his or her defence of the action and 
the employee shall be responsible for the payment of any damages or costs awarded 
against him or her in the action. In addition, such an employee shall be liable to repay to 
the City upon written demand all costs incurred by the City in the defence on behalf of 
the employee of the action. In addition, in such circumstances, the City reserves the right 
to claim indemnity from the employee for any damages or costs which may be suffered 
by the City. 

Where an employee's employment has been terminated by the City and the City has 
alleged that it had just cause for termination, the City may, in its sole discretion and 
whether or not just cause has been determined by a court of law, decide that it will not 
provide coverage under this article or may cease to provide coverage previously afforded 
under this article. In such circumstances that employee shall be responsible for all costs 
in connection with his or her defence of the action, and the employee shall be responsible 

39-3 

December 30, 2000 

 
 
 
TORONTO MUNICIPAL CODE 
CHAPTER 39, DEFENCE AND INDEMNIFICATION 

for the payment of any damages or costs awarded against him or her in the action. Where 
coverage has already been provided and the City thereafter terminates the employee and 
alleges just cause, then the employee shall be liable to repay to the City all legal costs 
incurred by the City in the defence on behalf of the employee of the action. In addition, in 
such circumstances, the City reserves the right to claim indemnity from the employee for 
any damages which may be suffered by the City. Under no circumstances will an 
employee's termination and the allegation by the City of just cause for the termination 
together with the decision by the City to refuse to afford coverage or to terminate 
coverage constitute a conflict for the purposes of § 39-5. [Amended 2000-10-05 by By-
law No. 869-2000] 

H.  Where the City represents an employee or pays for the legal costs the employee incurs in 

defending an action, such representation or payment shall take into account any association 
sponsored or prepaid legal assistance plan or available insurance personal to the employee 
and shall be reduced or repaid to the City to the extent that any such costs are received by 
the employee. In addition, if the employee receives and collects upon an order of costs in 
the action, those costs shall be paid to the City. 

I. 

In order to receive the benefit of this article, the employee must agree to execute any and 
all documents required by the City to enable the City to subrogate itself to the position of 
the employee as concerns the action. 

§ 39-5. Conflicts. 

A.  Where the employee has been afforded coverage under this article and where in connection 
with an action there exists or arises a conflict between the City and an employee, the 
employee may, subject to the provisions of this article, retain his or her own legal counsel 
for his or her defence of the action. 

B.  The City shall not be obliged to pay for the legal costs of an employee's own counsel 

unless, in addition to the other provisions of this article being met, the City, through the 
City, has approved of the legal counsel retained by the employee. 

C. 

In connection with an action, where there is a dispute between the City and an employee as 
to whether or not a conflict exists as between them, that dispute shall be resolved by 
discussion between the City and the employee or, failing the success of such discussions, 
by an arbitrator appointed pursuant to the Arbitration Act 1991 (Ontario) who shall 
summarily determine the question as to whether or not a conflict exists. Such determination 
shall be final and shall not be appealable on any ground. 

§ 39-6. Investigation, negotiation and settlement. 

In any action, whether the employee is separately represented or not, the City may make such 
investigation, negotiation or settlement on behalf of the City and the employee, or either one of 
them, as may be deemed appropriate by the City. 

39-4 

December 30, 2000 

 
 
 
TORONTO MUNICIPAL CODE 
CHAPTER 39, DEFENCE AND INDEMNIFICATION 

§ 39-7. Counterclaims and third-party actions. 

An employee may not commence either a counterclaim or a third-party proceeding as part of an 
action unless the commencement of such proceedings has been approved, in advance, by the 
City. 

§ 39-8. Appeals by the employee. 

Where an employee seeks to appeal a judgement in an action, the City shall, in its sole discretion, 
determine whether to represent the employee in the appeal and whether the costs of the appeal 
will be paid for by the City. Where the City determines that it will not represent the employee on 
an appeal or pay the legal costs associated with such an appeal by an employee, the employee 
may nevertheless proceed with the appeal at his or her own expense. If this occurs and the 
employee is successful in the appeal, the City may, in its sole discretion, determine whether it 
will reimburse the employee for his or her costs of the appeal. 

§ 39-9. Assessment of accounts. 

The City shall have the right to assess any account rendered by counsel acting for any employee 
in the defence of an action. 

§ 39-10. Without prejudice. 

Nothing in this article shall prejudice the City in any claim, action or proceeding that the City has 
or might have against the employee in connection with the Year 2000 problem or otherwise. 

39-5 

December 30, 2000 

 
 
 
 
