TORONTO MUNICIPAL CODE 
CHAPTER 459, FILMING 

Chapter 459 

FILMING 

§ 459-1. Definitions. 

§ 459-2. Permit required. 

§ 459-2.1. School board permits. 

§ 459-3. Application for permit. 

§ 459-4. Issuance of permit; agreement; suspension or revocation of permit. 

§ 459-5. Appeals. 

§ 459-6. Rights of permit holder. 

§ 459-7. Temporary closure of highways. 

§ 459-8. Offences. 

[History: Adopted by the Council of the City of Toronto April 15, 1999 by By-law 170-1999. 
Amendments noted where applicable.] 

General References 

Temporary closing of highways - See Ch. 937. 

§ 459-1. Definitions. 

As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:  

COMMISSIONER - The Commissioner of Economic Development, Tourism and Culture or his 
or her designate unless otherwise stated. 

FILMING - The activities required for the preparation or production of film for cinematographic 
purposes outside a studio or film laboratory and includes the production of commercials and 
videos, but does not include current affairs, news casts, street interviews or home movies. 

GUIDELINES - The Guidelines for Filming in the City of Toronto. 

HIGHWAY - Any public highway, road or street under the jurisdiction of the City and shall 
include any bridge, sidewalk, boulevard, median, lane, alley, square or thoroughfare. 

PARK - Land and land covered by water and all portions thereof owned by or made available by 
lease, agreement or otherwise to the city that is or hereafter may be established, dedicated, set 
apart or made available for use as public open space or golf course, and that has been or hereafter 
may be placed under the jurisdiction of the Commissioner, including any and all buildings, 

459-1 

February 1, 2018 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TORONTO MUNICIPAL CODE 
CHAPTER 459, FILMING 

structures, facilities, erections and improvements located in or on such land, save and except 
where such land is governed by other by-laws of the City. 

PERMIT - Any permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 

PROPERTY - Any real property owned, leased or under the control or jurisdiction of the City. 

§ 459-2. Permit required. 

No person shall occupy any portion of a highway, property or park under the jurisdiction of the 
City of Toronto for filming purposes except in accordance with a valid permit issued pursuant to 
this chapter. 

§ 459-2.1. School board permits. 

[Added 2018-02-01 by By-law 162-2018] 

The Commissioner is authorized to issue permits for filming on school board property in 
connection with Spotlight on Toronto: the Strategic Action Plan for the Film, Television and 
Digital Media Industry. 

§ 459-3. Application for permit. 

Any person desiring to occupy a portion of a highway, property or park for filming purposes 
shall apply for a permit to the Commissioner in accordance with the Guidelines. 

§ 459-4. Issuance of permit; agreement; suspension or revocation of permit. 

A. 

The Commissioner, through the Toronto Film and Television Office, shall issue the 
permit for the period specified in the permit subject to the applicant for the permit 
entering into an agreement: 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

To comply with this chapter, the Guidelines, the City of Toronto Code of Conduct 
for Cast and Crew, and any other by-laws of the City. 

To indemnify and save harmless the City of Toronto from any action, claim, 
damage or loss whatsoever and pay legal fees reasonably incurred by the City 
arising from the issuance of the permit or the use of the highway, property or 
park. 

To provide a certificate of insurance in accordance with the Guidelines and in a 
form satisfactory to the City Treasurer. 

To provide a security deposit, where deemed necessary, in an amount satisfactory 
to the Commissioner to ensure that the highway, property or park is restored to the 
condition it was in prior to its occupation or use. 

459-2 

February 1, 2018 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TORONTO MUNICIPAL CODE 
CHAPTER 459, FILMING 

B. 

If an applicant fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter, the Guidelines, the 
Code of Conduct for Cast and Crew, any agreement entered into pursuant to this chapter 
or any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the Commissioner may revoke or suspend 
the permit forthwith without notice. 

§ 459-5. Appeals. 

Where the Commissioner revokes, suspends or refuses to approve the issuance of a permit, the 
applicant may request that the matter be referred to the applicable Community Council for its 
determination. 

§ 459-6. Rights of permit holder. 

Despite any other by-law of the City, where a permit has been issued under § 459-4 or 459-5, the 
holder of it may use the highway, property or park or part of it named in the permit for the 
purposes and during the period specified in the permit, upon the terms and conditions set out in 
the permit and as contained in the agreement made under § 459-4 or 459-5. 

§ 459-7. Temporary closure of highways. 

The Commissioner of Works and Emergency Services or his or her designate may authorize the 
temporary closure of a highway, or portion of it, during the period specified in the permit issued 
under § 459-4 or 459-5, and where a highway or portion of it has been temporarily closed under 
this section or pursuant to any other by-law of the City, no person shall use the highway or 
portion of it during the period of closure except for pedestrian traffic or under the authority of the 
permit. 

§ 459-8. Offences. 

Any person who contravenes any provision of this chapter is guilty of an offence and on 
conviction is liable to a fine in such amount provided for by the Provincial Offences Act.1 

1

 Editor's Note: Under section 61 of the Provincial Offences Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. P.33, a person convicted of an offence is liable to a fine of 

not more than $5,000. 

459-3 

February 1, 2018 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
